---
title: 'Pet Fountain Care Guide'
date: 
draft: true
tags: ['Information']
---

So you purchased our recommended best pet fountain of 2017 for your cat, now you need to take care of it to make sure it will last you a long time! After all, these aren't the cheapest things to be constantly replacing. The primary concern is the health of your pet, and therefor the quality of the water. We like to filter our water through a Pur water filter before we drink it ourselves, and we extend that same courtesy to our cat.

Filtering the water before you put it in the bowl will help extend the life of the pump because the water you're putting in there will already be free of most of the bacteria and germs that are needed to form gross algae.

When we talk about the life of the fountain, we're really talking about the life of the pump. If you don't keep the bowl clean and the water fresh, various molds, mildews, and algae will begin to build up inside of the pump. Along with being extremely gross and unhealthy for your cat (or dog), this bacteria will also clog up the pump and cause it to burn out. And replacing pumps is just as expensive as replacing the entire bowl altogether.

To avoid this from happening you need to empty all of the water out of your pet fountain at least once _every single week_. This is actually pretty easy to do if you schedule it! We have systems in place to help us manage our cat, and those systems need refreshing on a weekly basis, so we just add the cat bowl to the list! That means that every Friday, I change her litter pad, I take out the waste from the Litter Genie, and I swap the water in her bowl.

When you empty the water out of the bowl, make sure that you give the bowl a wipe down. You don't need to use soap, just a washcloth or paper towel and some warm water. Enough so that any "slick" feeling buildup or scum is removed.

Your pet fountain should have a large and robust charcoal filter that doesn't need frequent changing. Simply rinse this out well and make sure there isn't any build up on the filter. Now just refill the bowl with water and you're good to go!

Once a month you'll need to do a bit better of a cleaning. For us, we just do this the first Friday of the month. Make sure you clean the bowl with soap and warm water. Any surface that water touches will need a good once over. If the filter is due for a change then go ahead and change it. If it is still within it's usable period, consider cleaning it to the best of your ability with hot water (NO SOAP!!) and then soaking it for a few hours in white vinegar.

You don't want to use soap on the filter because some of it could get trapped in the filter. Dish soap specifically cleans so well because of a chemical called "Triclosan" - which is such a potent chemical that the FDA banned it's use in soaps in September of 2016. Soap companies have up to one year to comply with the ruling, however, so many of the soaps you currently have or will own for the next 8 to 12 months will likely have Triclosan as the active ingredient.

If you use soap on your filter, it is likely that a good bit of it will get trapped inside and weep triclosan into your pet's water. That is absolutely no good.

A soak in Vinegar and some time in warm sunlight will clean the filter just as effectively and can be rinsed away. And if a little vinegar gets into your pet's water, it likely won't have any negative effect.

Make sure you also soak the pump in vinegar periodically to help remove any build up that may be in there. Consider getting a fine bristled brush to clean inside the pump as well.

If you follow these steps, you'll find that your fountain will last you through 2017 and for quite a few years beyond that.